Version 9.1.0 of deal.II, the object-oriented finite element library awarded the
J. H. Wilkinson Prize for Numerical Software, has been released. It is
available for free under an Open Source license from the deal.II homepage at

                   https://www.dealii.org/

The major changes of this release are:

  - The support for automatic and symbolic differentiation within deal.II has
    been completely overhauled and significantly extended. The automatic
    differentiation facilities integrate a broad spectrum of functionality,
    including support in the evaluation of finite element shape functions
    (FEValues) and associated point and tensor data structures. Functionality
    from both the ADOL-C as well as Sacado library in various modes is
    included. For symbolic differentiation, new wrappers to the
    high-performance SymEngine library allow an alternative approach
    addressing the syntax levels of expressions to compute derivatives, rather
    than the algorithmic approach underlying automatic differentiations.

  - Full support for hp adaptivity in parallel computations. deal.II has
    had support for hp-adaptive methods since around 2005, but not yet in
    combination with MPI. In order to gain support for parallel hp adaptivity
    a number of algorithmic issues were addressed in this release. Details
    can be found in the release paper.

  - A new HDF5 interface has been added in order to leverage
    its capabilities in terms of high-performance I/O for large amount of
    data. The HDF5 interfaces in deal.II support read and write operations
    both in serial and with MPI.

  - GPU support was significantly extended for the current release:
    Added features include preconditioners for CUDAWrappers::SparseMatrix
    objects, support for MPI-parallel CUDA data structures, and support for
    constraints in the matrix-free framework (and thus also support for
    adaptively refined meshes).

  - Four new tutorial programs have been added, step-61 demonstrating an
    implementation of the so-called weak Galerkin method, step-62 solving the
    elastic wave equation with perfectly matched layers to calculate the
    resonance frequency and bandgap of photonic crystals, step-63 on block and
    point smoothers for geometric multigrid in the context of
    convection-diffusion problems, and step-64 implementing a Helmholtz solver
    with matrix-free methods running on GPUs. Furthermore, a new code gallery
    program solving a Bayesian inverse problem has been added.

  - The release contains performance improvements and bug fixes of the
    matrix-free framework and related geometric multigrid solvers. In
    particular, the implementation of the Chebyshev iteration, an often used
    smoother in the matrix-free context, has been revised to reduce vector
    accesses. Altogether, matrix-free multigrid solvers run up to 15% faster
    than in the previous version.

  - Various variants of geometric multigrid solvers and matrix-free
    implementations were run on up to 304,128 MPI ranks during the acceptance
    phase of the SuperMUC-NG supercomputer, verifying the scalability of our
    implementations to this scale. Some geometric multigrid data structures
    were revised to avoid bottlenecks showing up with more than 100k ranks.

  - The FE_BernardiRaugel class implements the non-standard
    Bernardi-Raugel element that can be used to construct a stable
    velocity-pressure pair for the Stokes equation. The Bernardi-Raugel
    element is an enriched version of the Q_1^d element with added bubble
    functions on each edge (in 2d) or face (in 3d). It addresses the fact
    that the Q_1^d - Q_0 combination is not inf-sup stable (requiring a
    larger velocity space), and that the Q_2^d - Q_1 combination is
    stable but sub-optimal since the velocity space is too large relative to
    the pressure space to provide additional accuracy commensurate with the
    cost of the large number of velocity unknowns. The Bernardi-Raugel
    space is intermediate to the Q_1^d and Q_2^d spaces.

  - The FE_NedelecSZ class is a new implementation of the Nédélec element
    on quadrilaterals and hexahedra. It overcomes the sign conflict issues
    present in traditional Nédélec elements that arise from the edge
    and face parameterizations used in the basis functions. Therefore, this
    element should provide consistent results for general quadrilateral and
    hexahedral elements for which the relative orientations of edges and
    faces (as seen from all adjacent cells) are often difficult to establish.

  - A new class ParsedConvergenceTable has been introduced. The class
    simplifies the construction of convergence tables, reading the options
    for the generation of the table from a parameter file. It provides a
    series of methods that can be used to compute the error given a
    reference exact solution, or the difference between two numerical
    solutions, or any other custom computation of the error, given via
    std::function objects.

  - A new interface to \texttt{boost::geometry::index::rtree} has been
    added. The rtree provides a data structure for handling bounding boxes
    that cover the whole triangulation, and allow to identify e.g. the cell a
    certain point is located in logarithmic time, or queries regarding the
    cell owners of far-field cells in a distributed setup.

  - More than 200 other features and bugfixes.

For more information see
  - the preprint at https://www.dealii.org/deal91-preprint.pdf
  - the list of changes at
    https://www.dealii.org/developer/doxygen/deal.II/changes_between_9_0_1_and_9_1_0.html

The main features of deal.II are:
  - Extensive documentation and 63 fully-functional example programs
  - Support for dimension-independent programming
  - Locally refined adaptive meshes
  - Multigrid support
  - A zoo of different finite elements
  - Fast linear algebra
  - Built-in support for shared memory and distributed parallel computing,
    scaling from laptops to clusters with 100,000+ processor cores
  - Interfaces to Trilinos, PETSc, METIS, UMFPACK and other external software
  - Output for a wide variety of visualization platforms.

Martin Kronbichler and Matthias Maier,
on behalf of the deal.II developer team and many contributors.
